## 2.3.1.2 Generalized Principal Components Estimation

If the idiosyncratic disturbances have different variances and/or some are cross correlated, then by analogy to generalized least squares, efficiency gains should be possible by modifying the least-squares problem (13) for a more general weight matrix. Specifically, let  $\Sigma_e$  denote the error variance matrix of  $e_i$ ; then the analogy to generalized least-squares regression suggests that  $F_t$  and  $\Lambda$  solve a weighted version of (13), where the weighting matrix is  $\Sigma_e^{-1}$ :

$$\min_{F_1, ..., F_T, \Lambda} T^{-1} \sum_{t=1}^{T} (X_t - \Lambda F_t)' \Sigma_e^{-1} (X_t - \Lambda F_t). \tag{14}$$

A solution to (14) is the infeasible generalized PC estimator,  $\widetilde{F}_t = N^{-1} \widetilde{\Lambda}' X_t$ , where  $\widetilde{\Lambda}$  are the scaled eigenvectors corresponding to the r largest eigenvalues of  $\Sigma_e^{-1/2} \hat{\Sigma}_X \Sigma_e^{-1/2'}$ .

The feasible generalized PC estimator replaces the unknown  $\Sigma_e$  in (14) with an estimator  $\hat{\Sigma}_e$ . Choi (2012) shows that if  $\hat{\Sigma}_e$  is consistent for  $\Sigma_e$  then the feasible generalized PC estimator of  $\{F_t\}$  and  $\Lambda$  is asymptotically more efficient than principal components. Several estimators of  $\Sigma_e$  have been proposed. The limited amount of evidence from simulation and empirical work comparing their performance suggests that a reasonable approach is to use Boivin and Ng's (2006) two-step diagonal weight matrix approach, in which the first step is principal components (that is, identity weight matrix) and

g As stated in the beginning of this section, the series in *X* are typically preprocessed to have unit standard deviation, so in this sense the unweighted principal components estimator (13) implicitly also has weighting if it is expressed in terms of the nonstandardized data.

<span id="page-16-0"></span>the second step uses a diagonal  $\hat{\Sigma}_e$ , where the diagonal element is the sample variance of the estimated idiosyncratic component from the first step.

Other approaches include Forni et al.'s (2005), which allows for contemporaneous covariance across the idiosyncratic terms but does not adjust for serial correlation, and Stock and Watson's (2005) and Breitung and Tenhofen's (2011), which adjusts for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity in  $e_{it}$  but not cross correlation. See Choi (2012) for additional discussion.

#### 2.3.1.3 Extension to Restrictions on $\Lambda$

The principal components methods described in Sections 2.3.1.1 and 2.3.1.2 apply to the case that  $\Lambda$  and F are exactly identified using the principal components normalization. If there are additional restrictions on  $\Lambda$ , then principal components no longer applies but the least-squares concept does. Specifically, minimization can proceed using (13), however  $\Lambda$  is further parameterized as  $\Lambda(\theta)$  and minimization now proceeds over  $\theta$ , not over unrestricted  $\Lambda$ .

In general this minimization with respect to  $\theta$  entails nonlinear optimization. In some leading cases, however, closed-form solutions to the least-squares problem are available. One such case is a hierarchical DFM in which there are common factors that affect all variables, and group-level factors that affect only selected variables; for example, suppose the groups are countries, the group factors are country factors, and the cross-group common factors are international factors. If the factors are normalized to be orthogonal, the first-level factors can be estimated by principal components using all the series, then the factors unique to the gth group can be estimated by principal components using the residuals from projecting the group-g variables on the first-level factors. A second case is when the restrictions are linear, so that  $\text{vec}(\Lambda) = R\theta$ , where R is a fixed known matrix; in this case, standard regression formulas provide an explicit representation of the minimizer  $\hat{\theta}$  given  $\{\hat{F}_t\}$  and vice versa.

#### 2.3.2 Parametric State-Space Methods

State-space estimation entails specifying a full parametric model for  $X_t$ ,  $e_t$ , and  $f_t$  in the dynamic form of the DFM, so that the likelihood can be computed.

For parametric estimation, additional assumptions need to be made on the distribution of the errors and the dynamics of the idiosyncratic component  $e_t$  in the DFM. A common treatment is to model the elements of  $e_t$  as following the independent univariate autoregressions (3). With the further assumptions that the disturbances  $\nu_{it}$  in (3) are i.i.d.  $N(0, \sigma_{\nu_i}^2)$ ,  $i=1, \ldots, N$ ,  $\eta_t$  is i.i.d.  $N(0, \Sigma_{\eta})$ , and  $\{\nu_t\}$  and  $\{\eta_t\}$  are independent, Eqs. (1)–(3) constitute a complete linear state-space model. Alternatively, the static DFM can be written in state-space form using (6), (7), and (3).

Given the parameters, the Kalman filter can be used to compute the likelihood and the Kalman smoother can be used to compute estimates of  $f_t$  given the full-sample data on

<span id="page-17-0"></span>{Xt}. The likelihood can be maximized to obtain maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters. Alternatively, with the addition of a prior distribution, the Kalman filter can be used to compute the posterior distribution of the parameters and posterior estimates of the unobserved factors can be computed from the Kalman smoother. The fact that the state-space approach uses intertemporal smoothing to estimate the factors, whereas principal components approaches use only contemporaneous smoothing (averaging across series at the same date) is an important difference between the methods.

Parametric state-space methods have several advantages, including the use of quasimaximum likelihood estimation, the possibility of performing Bayes inference, efficient treatment of missing observations (this latter point is discussed further in the next section), and the use of intertemporal smoothing to estimate the factors. However, state-space methods also have drawbacks. Historically, their implementation becomes numerically challenging when N is large because the number of parameters grows proportionately to N, making maximum likelihood estimation of the parameter vector prohibitive.h In addition, state-space methods require specifying the degree of the factor loading lag polynomial and models for the factors and for the idiosyncratic terms. These modeling choices introduce potential misspecification which is not reflected in the model-based inference, that is, standard errors and posterior coverage regions are not robust to model misspecification.

## 2.3.3 Hybrid Methods and Data Pruning

#### 2.3.3.1 Hybrid Methods

One way to handle the computational problem of maximum likelihood estimation of the state-space parameters is to adopt a two-step hybrid approach that combines the speed of principal components and the efficiency of the Kalman filter [\(Doz et al., 2011](#page-105-0)). In the first step, initial estimates of factors are obtained using principal components, from which the factor loadings are estimated and a model is fit to the idiosyncratic components. In the second step, the resulting parameters are used to construct a state-space model which then can be used to estimate Ft by the Kalman filter. [Doz et al. \(2011\)](#page-105-0) show that, for large N and T, the resulting estimator of the factors is consistent for the factor space and is robust to misspecification of the correlation structure of the idiosyncratic components, and thus has a nonparametric interpretation.

#### 2.3.3.2 Pruning Datasets and Variable Selection

The discussion so far assumes that all the variables have been chosen using a priori knowledge to include series that are potentially valuable for estimating the factors. Because the emphasis is on using many variables, one possibility is that some extraneous variables

<sup>h</sup> [Durbin and Koopman \(2012, section 6.5\)](#page-105-0) discuss computationally efficient formulae for Kalman filtering when N is large.

could be included, and that it might be better to eliminate those variables. Whether this is a problem, and if so how to handle it, depends on the empirical application. If there is a priori reason to model the factors as applying to only some variables (for example, there are multiple countries and interest is in obtaining some country-specific and some international factors) then it is possible to use a hierarchical DFM. In effect this prunes out variables of other countries when estimating a given country factors. Another approach is to use prescreening methods to prune the dataset, see for example [Bai and](#page-103-0) [Ng \(2006a\)](#page-103-0). Alternatively, sparse data methods can be used to eliminate some of the variables, for example using a sparsity prior in a state-space formulation (eg, [Kaufmann and](#page-107-0) [Schumacher, 2012](#page-107-0)).

## 2.3.4 Missing Data and Mixed Data Sampling Frequencies

Missing data arise for various reasons. Some series might begin sooner than others, the date of the final observation on different series can differ because of timing of data releases, and in some applications the series might have different sampling frequencies (eg, monthly and quarterly). The details of how missing data are handled differ in principal components and state-space applications. All the procedures in common use (and, to the best of our knowledge, all the procedures in the literature) adopt the assumption that the data are missing at random. Under the missing-at-random assumption, whether a datum is missing is independent of the latent variables (no endogenous sample selection). The missing-at-random assumption arguably is a reasonable assumption for the main sources of missing data in DFMs in most macroeconomic applications to date.

#### 2.3.4.1 Principal Components Estimation with Missing Data

The solution to the least-squares [problem \(13\)](#page-15-0) in terms of the eigenvalues of Σ^<sup>X</sup> holds when all NT observations are nonmissing, that is, when the panel is balanced. When there are missing observations, least-squares still can be used to estimate Ft and Λ, however the solution must be obtained numerically. Specifically, the modification of [\(13\)](#page-15-0) when there is missing data is,

$$\min_{F_1, \dots, F_T, \Lambda} \frac{1}{NT} \sum_{i=1}^{N} \sum_{t=1}^{T} S_{it} (X_{it} - \Lambda_i F_t)^2, \tag{15}$$

where Sit¼1 if an observation on Xit is available and Sit¼0 otherwise and where Λ<sup>i</sup> is the ith row of Λ. The objective function in (15) can be minimized by iterations alternating with Λ given {Ft} then {Ft} given Λ; each step in the minimization has a closedform expression. Starting values can be obtained, for example, by principal component estimation using a subset of the series for which there are no missing observations. Alternatively, [Stock and Watson \(2002b\)](#page-109-0) provide an EM algorithm for handling missing observations.

Given an estimate of the factor loadings and factors based on missing data, the estimated common component for the *i*th series remains  $\hat{A}_i\hat{F}_t$  and the one step ahead forecast is given by (10), where the parameters of (10) are estimated treating  $\hat{F}_t$  as data.

#### 2.3.4.2 State-Space Estimation with Missing Data

The state-space framework can be adapted to missing data by allowing the measurement Eq. (1) to vary depending on what data are available at a given date t; see Harvey (1989, p. 325). Alternatively, the dimension of the measurement equation can be kept the same by including a proxy value for the missing observation while adjusting the model parameters so that the Kalman filter places no weight on the missing observation. See Giannone et al. (2008), Mariano and Murasawa (2010), and Marcellino and Sivec (2014) for variations on this latter approach.

For large N, one computational challenge is keeping the dimension of the state vector small as N grows, which is more complicated with missing observations than with all observations nonmissing; see Jungbacker et al. (2011) and Bańbura and Modugno (2014) for discussion and proposed computationally efficient solutions.

One theoretical advantage of the state-space approach to mixed frequencies is that it can pin down when precisely the measurement occurs (eg, the US establishment survey measures payroll employment during the week including the 12th of the month). A second theoretical advantage of the state-space approach is that it can explicitly differentiate between stock variables (observed at a point in time, like employment) and flow variables (temporal averages, like GDP). In practice, dealing with flows is complicated, however, because the flow aggregation identities are in levels but the variables being measured, such as sectoral output, are typically best modeled in growth rates. These complications require approximations and can substantially increase the dimension of the latent state variable. For an application with mixed sampling frequencies and mixed stock and flow variables, see Aruoba et al. (2009). See Foroni and Marcellino (2013) for a survey of methods for handling mixed-frequency data, including DFMs and alternative approaches.

There appears to be little research comparing the performance of parametric and nonparametric approaches to mixed-frequency data.

#### 2.3.5 Bayes Methods

An alternative approach to estimating DFMs is to use Bayes methods. In Bayesian estimation, the DFM parameters are treated as random draws from a prior distribution. Because the factors are unobserved and multiplied by the coefficients, Bayesian inference is more complicated than it is in the standard regression model with observed regressors and conjugate priors, and Bayesian DFM estimation requires using modern numerical techniques.

The first Bayesian treatments of DFMs of which we are aware are [Kim and Nelson](#page-107-0) [\(1998\)](#page-107-0)and [Otrok and Whiteman \(1998\),](#page-108-0) who both estimated a small single-factor system using Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods. [Kim and Nelson \(1998\)](#page-107-0) also incorporated Markov switching in the process for the latent factor. In other early work, [Kose et al.](#page-107-0) [\(2003\)](#page-107-0) extend [Otrok and Whiteman \(1998\)](#page-108-0) to a 180-variable system with international macroeconomic data, using a hierarchical regional/country structure. [Aguilar and West](#page-102-0) [\(2000\)](#page-102-0) developed Bayes methods for estimating dynamic factor models with stochastic volatility, which they apply to multivariate financial time series.

A theoretical advantage of Bayes methods is that the mean squared error of some functions of the estimated parameters (such as in forecast functions) can be reduced by shrinkage. [Koopman and Mesters \(forthcoming\)](#page-107-0) take an empirical Bayes approach to estimating the efficientamount of shrinkage. Their algorithm iterates between estimation of the factors by Gaussian signal extraction (Kalman smoother) and Bayes estimation of the parameters given the consistently estimated factors.

To date, the dominant methods used in macro applications are Frequentist, especially the computationally straightforward methods based on principal components. This chapter therefore focuses on Frequentist methods for estimation of DFMs. However, because the number of parameters in Λ is large, Bayes methods for DFMs are a promising area for improving estimator and forecast performance from a Frequentist perspective.

# 2.4 Determining the Number of Factors

# 2.4.1 Estimating the Number of Static Factors r

The number of static factors r can be determined by a combination of a priori knowledge, visual inspection of a scree plot, and the use of information criteria and other statistical measures.

#### 2.4.1.1 Scree Plots

A scree plot displays the marginal contribution of the kth principal component to the average R<sup>2</sup> of the N regressions of Xt against the first k principal components. This marginal contribution is the average additional explanatory value of the kth factor. When there are no missing data, the scree plot is a plot of the ordered eigenvalues of Σ^X, normalized by the sum of the eigenvalues.

#### 2.4.1.2 Information Criteria

Information criteria, such as the Akaike information criterion, use a penalized objective function to trade off the benefit of including an additional parameter against the cost of increased sampling variability. [Bai and Ng \(2002\)](#page-103-0) extend this idea to including an additional factor using the penalized sum of squares,

$$IC(r) = \ln V_r(\hat{\Lambda}, \hat{F}) + rg(N, T), \tag{16}$$

<span id="page-21-0"></span>where  $V_r(\hat{\Lambda}, \hat{F})$  is the least-squares objective function in (13) evaluated at the PCs  $(\hat{\Lambda}, \hat{F})$ , and where g(N,T) is a penalty factor such that  $g(N,T) \to 0$  and  $\min(N,T)g(N,T) \to \infty$  as  $N, T \to \infty$ . Bai and Ng (2002) provide conditions under which the value of r that minimizes an information criterion with g(N,T) satisfying these conditions is consistent for the true value of r. A commonly used penalty function is the Bai and Ng (2002)  $IC_{p2}$  penalty, for which  $g(N,T) = [(N+T)/NT] \ln[\min(N,T)]$ . When N=T, this penalty simplifies to two times the BIC penalty,  $T^{-1} \ln T$ . Monte Carlo evidence suggests that this penalty function works well in designs calibrated to macroeconomic data.

#### 2.4.1.3 Other Approaches

Onatski (2010) provides an alternative consistent estimator of r which estimates r as the largest value of k for which the difference between eigenvalues k and k+1 of  $\hat{\Sigma}_X$  exceeds a threshold provided in that paper; this estimator corresponds to finding the final "cliff" in the scree plot larger than that threshold. Similarly, Ahn and Horenstein (2013) show that an alternative consistent estimator of r is obtained as the maximizer of the ratio of eigenvalue k to eigenvalue k+1; their estimator corresponds to locating the largest "relative cliff" in the scree plot. Onatski (2009) takes a different approach and considers tests as opposed to estimation of r by information criteria.

Practical experience suggests that different methods frequently give different estimates. There is limited research comparing the performance of the different methods. This sensitivity suggests that it is important to augment the statistical estimators with inspection of the scree plot and with judgment informed by the application at hand.

## 2.4.2 Estimating the Number of Dynamic Factors q

In principle, the number of dynamic factors can be less than the number of static factors and if so, the static factors follow a singular dynamic process. Framed in terms of (7), these singularities arise because the covariance matrix of the innovations to  $F_t$  (that is,  $G\eta_t$  in (7)) is singular with rank q < r. This implies that the spectral density matrix of  $F_t$  is singular. Estimation of q given r entails estimating the rank of this singularity. Although in principle an information criterion could be used to estimate the number of dynamic factors based on the likelihood of the dynamic form of the DFM, estimating q given r has the advantage that it is unnecessary to compute that likelihood.

There are three related methods for consistently estimating q given r. Amengual and Watson (2007) first compute the residual of the projection of  $X_t$  onto lagged values of the PC estimator of  $F_t$ , then apply the Bai and Ng (2002) information criterion to the covariance matrix of those residuals. Bai and Ng (2007) work directly with the factors and use an information criterion to estimate the rank of the residual covariance matrix of a VAR estimated using the r principal components. In contrast to these two approaches, Hallin

<span id="page-22-0"></span>and Liška (2007) propose a frequency-domain procedure which uses an information criterion to estimate the rank of the spectral density matrix of  $X_t$ . There seems to be limited research comparing these methods.

## 2.5 Breaks and Time-Varying Parameters

The discussion so far has considered DFMs with time-invariant parameters. In many applications, however, there is at least the possibility of parameter instability. This section reviews the robustness of PC estimator of the factors to small breaks. If, however, the instability is large and widespread, the full-sample PC estimator breaks down. As a result, in many applications it is important to check for and/or model structural instability in the factor loadings. There are two broad approaches to handling instability in DFMs: positing a break in the parameters, and modeling the parameters as evolving stochastically.

#### 2.5.1 Robustness of PC to Limited Instability

If the amount of instability is small and/or limited across variables, the PC estimator of the factors remains consistent. The intuition behind this initially surprising result can be seen by returning to the example of Section 2.3.1 of the cross-sectional average when there is a single factor. Suppose that the static factor loading matrix is time dependent, so that  $\Lambda$  in (6) is replaced by  $\Lambda_t$ . Then  $\bar{X}_t = \overline{\Lambda}_t F_t + \bar{e}_t$ , where  $\overline{\Lambda}_t$  is the cross-sectional average of  $\Lambda_t$ . Let  $\overline{\Lambda}$  denote the time average of  $\overline{\Lambda}_t$ . Then  $\bar{X}_t - \overline{\Lambda} F_t = \left(\overline{\Lambda}_t - \overline{\Lambda}\right) F_t + \bar{e}_t$ . If only a vanishing fraction of series have a break in their factor loadings, or if the breaks in  $\Lambda_{it}$  are stochastic, have limited temporal dependence, and are uncorrelated across series, or if  $\Lambda_{it}$  has persistent drift which has mean zero and is uncorrelated across series, then by the law of large numbers  $\overline{\Lambda}_t - \overline{\Lambda}_t = 0$  and  $\overline{e}_t = 0$  so that  $\overline{X}_t - \overline{\Lambda}_t = 0$ . Thus, despite this nontrivial instability, if  $\overline{\Lambda}_t$  is nonzero,  $\overline{X}_t$  estimates the factor up to scale.

Bates et al. (2013) provide general conditions on parameter instability under which the PC estimator remains consistent. They show, for example, that the factor estimates remain consistent if there is a large discrete break in the factor loadings for a fraction  $O(N^{-1/2})$  of the series, or if the factor loadings follow independent random walks with relatively small innovations, as long as those innovations are independent across series. For these instabilities, tests for stability of  $\Lambda$  would reject with probability tending to one in large samples but the PC estimator remains consistent.

Despite these robustness results for the estimated factors, the coefficients in any specific equation could have large drift or breaks. Stock and Watson (2009) provide evidence

i Specifically, Bates et al. (2013) show that if  $\Lambda_t = \Lambda_0 + h_{NT} \xi_t$ , where  $h_{NT} = O(1/\min[N^{1/4}T^{1/2}, T^{3/4}])$ , then the estimated factors achieve the Bai and Ng (2002) mean square consistency rate of  $1/\min(N, T)$ .

J Stock and Watson (2009) provide some empirical evidence that suggests the relevance of such breaks. In a pseudo out-of-sample forecasting exercise using US macroeconomic data, they find evidence of a break in 1984 in the factor loadings, but also find that the best forecasts are produced by estimating the factors over the full data span but estimating the factor loadings over the post-1984 subset.

<span id="page-23-0"></span>that allowing for such instability can be important in practice when interest is in a specific series (say, for forecasting), even if full-sample principal components estimates of the factors are used.

#### 2.5.2 Tests for Instability

Despite this insensitivity of the PC estimator to some forms of instability in the factor loadings, principal components is not robust to widespread large breaks or to large time variation in  $\Lambda$  that is systematically correlated across series. Following Stock and Watson (2009) and Breitung and Eickmeier (2011), consider the case in which  $\Lambda$  takes on two values:

$$X_t = \Lambda_t F_t + e_t, \quad \Lambda_t = \begin{cases} \Lambda^{(1)} \text{ if } t < \tau \\ \Lambda^{(2)} \text{ if } t \ge \tau \end{cases}$$
 (17)

For this discussion, suppose the dynamics of the factor structure does not change. Thus the DFM holds in both regimes, with the same r factors, but with different factor loadings. As shown by Stock and Watson (2009) and Breitung and Eickmeier (2011), if the break in  $\Lambda$  is widespread across the series, the split-sample PC estimators of the factors will differ from each other. Moreover, if there are r factors in each subsample and a widespread break in  $\Lambda$ , then in the full sample it will appear as though there are 2r factors. Breitung and Eickmeier (2011) provide Monte Carlo evidence that as a result the Bai and Ng (2002) procedure would systematically overestimates the number of factors.

There are now a number of tests for breaks in the factor loadings. Stock and Watson (2009) consider the problem of breaks in a single equation and suggest regressing each variable on the estimated factors and implementing break tests for each regression. Breitung and Eickmeier (2011) consider a related Lagrange multiplier test that handles breaks in a fixed finite number of DFM equations; their test appears to improve size control, relative to the Stock and Watson (2009) approach. Tests proposed by Chen et al. (2014) and Han and Inoue (2015) test for a general break in  $\Lambda$  (all equations) by noting that, if  $\Lambda$  changes, the covariance matrix of the full-sample PC estimator will change at the break date in  $\Lambda$ . Chen et al.'s (2014) test entails testing for a break in the regression of one of the estimated factors on the others. Han and Inoue (2015) test for a break in the full covariance matrix of the PC estimator of the factors. All the foregoing break tests generalize to unknown break dates using standard methods. Cheng et al. (Forthcoming) take a different approach and extend LASSO methods to consider changes in the factor loadings and/or changes in the number of factors.

Care must be taken when interpreting these break tests for at least two reasons. First, although these tests are for a discrete break, break tests have power against other types of parameter instability, in particular against drifting parameters.<sup>k</sup>

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>k</sup> See, for example, Stock and Watson (1998) and Elliott and Müller (2006).

Second, a more subtle issue of interpretation is that, although these tests are designed to detect breaks in Λ and thus breaks in the factor space, at least some of them will have power against heteroskedasticity in the factor innovations and/or breaks in the VAR process followed by the factors. This power against heteroskedasticity in some tests but not others arises because of different normalizations used in the tests. In principle, these different sources of instability—breaks in Λ, heteroskedasticity in the factor innovations, and breaks in the VAR process for Ft—are separately identified. These tests are new and their relative power against different types of breaks has not been studied in any detail. Because the modeling and substantive implications of a widespread break in Λ are quite different from those of a change in the volatility of the factor innovations, interpretation of rejections must be sensitive to this ambiguity.<sup>l</sup>

## 2.5.3 Incorporating Time-Varying Factor Loadings and Stochastic Volatility

Although tests for stability can detect breaks or evolution of the DFM parameters, the empirical significance of that instability must be assessed by estimating the model taking into account the instability.

The most straightforward way to estimate the DFM taking into account the instability is through subsample estimation. However, doing so presumes a single common break date, and in many applications one might be concerned about continuous parameter drift, volatility clustering, or breaks for different series at different dates. If so, then it is appropriate to use a more flexible model of parameter change than the single common break model.

An alternative approach to time variation is to model the parameters as evolving stochastically rather than breaking at a single date. If parameter variation is small, this approach can be implemented in two steps, first estimating the factors by least squares, then estimating a time-varying model treating the factors as observed. See, for example, [Cogley and Sargent \(2005\)](#page-104-0) for time-varying parameter VAR methods for observed variables; for recent contributions and references see [Korobilis \(2014\)](#page-107-0). [Eickmeier et al. \(2015\)](#page-105-0)

<sup>l</sup> Empirical work applying break tests to DFMs suggests that DFM parameters have changed over the postwar sample. In particular, there is evidence of a break in the factor loadings around onset of the Great Moderation. [Stock and Watson \(2009\)](#page-109-0) find evidence of a break in 1984, the only date they consider. [Breitung and Eickmeier \(2011\)](#page-104-0) apply their tests for breaks at an unknown date and find breaks in multiple equations with estimated break dates around 1984. [Chen et al. \(2014\)](#page-104-0) also find breaks around 1980. [Stock](#page-109-0) and [Watson \(2012a\)](#page-109-0) and [Cheng et al. \(Forthcoming\)](#page-104-0) find evidence of breaks at the onset of the 2007 recession. [Stock and Watson \(2012a\)](#page-109-0) find that this break is in the variances of the factor innovations (in Ση), whereas Cheng et al. find that the breaks are in Λ. However, the Cheng et al. normalization imposes homoskedasticity in the factor innovations, so in their test a change in Ση would appear as a change in Λ; thus both sets of results are consistent with the break being in Ση. All these papers examine quarterly US data.

<span id="page-25-0"></span>work through the details of this two-step approach to time variation in DFMs. Using the results in [Bates et al. \(2013\)](#page-103-0) as motivation, [Eickmeier et al. \(2015\)](#page-105-0) suggest estimating the factors by principal components and treating them as observed. The time variation in the DFM is now easily handled equation-by-equation. They apply these methods in a timevarying FAVAR, but the methods equally apply to DFMs once one treats the estimated factors as observed.

If, however, the parameter variation is large then (as discussed in the previous section) this approach will yield misleading estimates of the factors. Consequently, recent work has focused on treating the factors as unobserved while allowing for and estimating time-varying stochastic processes for the factor loadings. An additional extension is to stochastic volatility in the innovations to the factors and idiosyncratic terms, which allows both for additional time variation in the implied filter and for volatility clustering in the data.

Much of the current work on time-varying DFMs uses or extends the model of [del](#page-105-0) Negro [and Otrok](#page-105-0) (2008). Their model allows the factor loadings to evolve according to a random walk: Λit¼Λit-1+σΔΛ,<sup>i</sup> ζit, where ζit is an i.i.d. N(0,1) disturbance. They also allow for time variation in the factor VAR coefficients and in the autoregressive coefficients describing the idiosyncratic dynamics. Finally, [del Negro and Otrok \(2008\)](#page-105-0) allow for stochastic volatility in the innovations to the factors and to the idiosyncratic disturbances. The result of these extensions of the DFM is that the state evolution equation is a nonlinear function of the state variables so that while it remains a hidden Markov model, it can no longer be estimated by the Kalman filter. [Del Negro and Otrok \(2008\)](#page-105-0) show how the model can instead be estimated by numerical Bayes methods. Papers that apply this algorithm or variants to DFMs with time-varying parameters include [Mumtaz and](#page-108-0) [Surico \(2012\),](#page-108-0) [Bj](#page-104-0)ørnland and [Thorsrud \(2015a\),](#page-104-0) and Stock [and Watson \(2015\)](#page-110-0). The details of these methods go beyond the scope of this chapter.

# 3. DFMs FOR MACROECONOMIC MONITORING AND FORECASTING

Two classic applications of DFMs are to real-time macroeconomic monitoring and to forecasting. The early hope of some researchers for DFMs—initially small DFMs and later "big data" high-dimensional DFMs—was that their ability to extract meaningful signals (factors) from noisy data would provide a breakthrough in macroeconomic forecasting. This early optimism turned out to be misplaced, arguably mainly because so many of the shocks that matter the most for the economy, such as the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq in August 1990 and the financial crisis in the fall of 2008, are simply not known in advance. This said, DFMs have resulted in meaningful forecasting improvements, especially for measures of real economic activity. They have also proven particularly useful for the important task of macroeconomic monitoring, that is, tracking economies in real time. The literature on using DFMs for forecasting and macro monitoring is vast. This section provides a selective survey of that literature, discusses some technical issues at a high level, and provides references for readers interested in the technical details.

# 3.1 Macroeconomic Monitoring

Economists at central banks, executive branches of government, and in the private sector track the evolution of the economy in real time, that is, they monitor the macroeconomy. A key part of macroeconomic monitoring is following and interpreting data releases to glean insights as to where the economy is at present, and where the economy is going. Macroeconomic monitoring has two salient challenges. First, data releases are peppered throughout the month and quarter, so that the available data change from day to day or even within a day, a feature referred to as the "ragged edge" problem. Second, the number of data releases and series contained within those releases is vast. Handling this flow of large volumes of disparate data requires judgment and knowledge of idiosyncratic events. Increasingly, the job of macroeconomic monitoring has also benefited from systematic high-dimensional modeling in the form of DFMs.

DFMs are used for two related macro monitoring tasks. The first is the construction of indices that distill the currently available data into a concise summary of economic conditions. The second is nowcasting, which is the task of "forecasting" the current value of a specific series which has not yet been released, for example, forecasting the value of fourth-quarter GDP in November.

## 3.1.1 Index Construction

A natural application of DFMs is to a classic problem in empirical macroeconomics, the construction of an index of indicators of economic activity. In the DFM, the latent factor summarizes the comovements of the observed variables, so in a DFM with a single factor, the estimate of the latent factor is a natural index of the movements of the relevant time series.

The first application of DFMs for real-time macromonitoring was the [Stock and](#page-109-0) Watson [\(1989, 1991\)](#page-109-0) experimental coincident index (XCI), which was released monthly through the National Bureau of Economic Research from May 1989 to December 2003. The XCI was the Kalman filter estimate of the single common factor among four monthly coincident indices: total nonfarm employment, the index of IP, real manufacturing and trade sales, and real personal income less transfers. The DFM was estimated by maximum likelihood in state-space form. This system handled the "ragged edge" problem of one of the series (real personal income less transfers) being available with a substantial delay, so the initial release of the index used a reduced-dimension measurement equation for the final observation. Retrospective analysis of the real-time experience showed that the XCI was successful in contemporaneous monitoring and (using a companion model for the probability of recessions) in real-time detection of the recession of 1990, however, the XCI and its associated leading index did not forecast the recession at the target 6-month horizon [\(Stock and Watson, 1993\)](#page-109-0).

Subsequent work with small state-space DFMs include the construction of monthly real activity indices for US states ([Crone and Clayton-Matthews, 2005](#page-105-0)), which has been released in real time by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia since 2005. [Mariano](#page-107-0) [and Murasawa \(2003\)](#page-107-0) extended the XCI to mixed-frequency data by including quarterly GDP. [Aruoba et al. \(2009\)](#page-103-0) developed a weekly index using mixed-frequency data (weekly, monthly, and quarterly), and the resulting "ADS" index is released in real time by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Much of the recent work on index construction has focused on higher dimensional systems. Since January 2001, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago has released in real time the monthly Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFNAI), which is the principal components estimate of the common factor in 85 real activity variables based on the real activity index constructed in [Stock and Watson \(1999\).](#page-109-0) Since January 2002, the UK Centre for Economic Policy Research has released in real time the monthly EuroCOIN index of EU real economic activity. EuroCOIN was developed by [Altissimo et al.](#page-102-0) [\(2001\)](#page-102-0) and initially incorporated 951 Euro-area activity variables.<sup>m</sup> The index was updated in [Altissimo et al. \(2010\);](#page-102-0) that version entails estimating the factors by principal components using 145 Euro-area real activity variables.

# 3.1.2 Nowcasting

Nowcasting focuses on predicting the current value of observable variables, such as current-quarter GDP. Nowcasting has long been done by economists using methods that allow the use of mixed-frequency data and intermittent releases. The older methods do not specify joint distributions and in general are variable-specific, often without a model structure tying together nowcasts across variables or over time as data become available. In contrast, DFMs permit specifying an internally consistent model that can be used for nowcasting multiple variables while placing appropriate weight on new data releases. Early nowcasting applications that use high dimensions and mixed frequencies in a statespace setting are [Evans \(2005\),](#page-105-0) [Giannone et al. \(2008\)](#page-106-0), and [Angelini et al. \(2010\)](#page-103-0). [Aastveit](#page-102-0) et al. [\(2014\)](#page-102-0) extend these methods to compute density nowcasts (not just point nowcasts) of GDP growth. Banbura, Giannone, Modugno, and Reichlin (2013) survey recent developments and technical issues in nowcasting.

<sup>m</sup> The index is calibrated to the smoothed component of GDP growth, specifically the reported index is the common component of Euro-area GDP, filtered to eliminate high-frequency variation.

# <span id="page-28-0"></span>3.2 Forecasting

The literature on forecasting with DFMs is very large and we do not attempt a comprehensive survey, instead we make some high-level comments. [Eickmeier and Ziegler](#page-105-0) [\(2008\)](#page-105-0) provide a survey and meta-analysis of work in the field through the mid-2000s. They find that factor forecasts tend to outperform small-model forecasts, and that factor forecasts tend to work better for US real activity than for US inflation. For more recent references, extensions of DFM forecasting methods, and comparisons to other high-dimensional methods, see [Stock and Watson \(2012b\),](#page-110-0) [D'Agostino and Giannone](#page-105-0) [\(2012\),](#page-105-0) [Clements \(Forthcoming\),](#page-104-0) and [Cheng and Hansen \(2015\).](#page-104-0)

# 4. IDENTIFICATION OF SHOCKS IN STRUCTURAL VARs

This section provides a self-contained survey of contemporary methods for identification of structural VARs. The methods are presented in a unified way that allows them to be adapted directly to structural DFMs, as discussed in the next section.

A long-standing goal of empirical macroeconomics is to estimate the effect on the economy of unanticipated structural disturbances, commonly called shocks. Examples of shocks include an unanticipated rate hike by the central bank (a monetary policy shock), an unexpected jump in oil prices due to oil supply disruptions (oil supply shock), an unexpected improvement in productivity (productivity shock), and an unanticipated shift in aggregate demand (demand shock). These shocks induce unexpected changes in the values of economic variables, for example, a contractionary monetary policy shock increases the short-term interest rate. Because these shocks are autonomous, they are uncorrelated with other shocks. Because shocks are unanticipated, they are serially uncorrelated.n

If a time series of shocks were observed, it would be straightforward to estimate the effect of that shock, say ε1t, on a macro variable yt by regressing yt on current and past values of ε1t. Because the shock ε1<sup>t</sup> is uncorrelated with the other shocks to the economy, that regression would have no omitted variable bias. The population coefficients of that regression would be the dynamic causal effect of that shock on the dependent variable, also called the structural impulse response function (SIRF). The cumulative sum of those population coefficients would be the cumulative causal effect of that shock over time, called the cumulative SIRF. Thus if the time series of shocks were observed, its dynamic effect could be estimated in a way that required no additional modeling assumptions. Unfortunately, a complete time series of shocks is rarely if ever observed—a constructed time series of shocks will have measurement error and/or miss some events—so that this ideal regression of yt on current and past ε1<sup>t</sup> typically is infeasible.

<sup>n</sup> See the chapter by [Ramey \(2016, this Handbook\)](#page-108-0) for an extensive discussion of shocks in structural VARs.

Because direct observation of a complete series of shocks without measurement error typically is infeasible, a large number of methods have been developed to identify shocks in time series models with a minimum of additional assumptions. The dominant framework for this identification, due to [Sims \(1980\)](#page-109-0), is structural vector autoregressions. The premise of SVARs is that the space of the innovations to a vector of time series variables Yt—that is, the one step ahead forecast errors of Yt based on a population projection of Yt onto its past values—spans the space of the structural shocks. Said differently, in population the econometrician is assumed to be as good at one step ahead forecasting of the economy as an agent who directly observes the structural shocks in real time. The task of identifying the structural shock of interest thus reduces to the task of finding the linear combination of the innovations that is the structural shock. [Sims \(1980\)](#page-109-0) originally proposed doing this construction using short-run "timing" restrictions. Subsequently, a host of other approaches for identifying structural shocks have been developed, including long-run restrictions based on the cumulative SIRFs, identification by heteroskedasticity, partial identification by sign restrictions on the SIRFs, and most recently by the use of external instruments.

This section has four themes. The first is the quest in the literature for increasingly credible identification schemes. This emphasis on identification parallels the identification revolution in microeconometrics, which stresses the importance of credible restrictions, typically in the form of isolating as-if random variation in the data, to identify a causal effect of interest.

Second, methods that identify a unique SIRF of interest (that is, identification schemes in which the SIRF is point identified) have natural interpretations in terms of instrumental variables or generalized method of moments (GMM) regression.

Third, we stress the importance of the choice of normalization of the shocks and make the case for what we call the unit effect normalization, which is different than the prevalent normalization that sets the shock variance to one. Although this normalization choice does not matter in population, it does matter in sample, and we argue that the unit effect normalization is the most natural in most applications. Moreover, the unit shock normalization makes the extension of SVAR methods to structural DFMs straightforward.

The fourth theme ties the previous three together: this quest for credible identification can push a research design to focus on exogenous movements that explain only a small fraction of the variation in the data, which in turn can affect inference. In the point-identified settings, we cast this potential pitfall in terms of weak instruments or weak identification. In the set-identified settings (eg, identification of SVARs by sign restrictions), these issues arise in the form of sensitivity of inference to Bayesian prior distributions, even if those priors are intended to be, in some sense, uninformative.

The focus of this section is explicating the normalization, identification schemes, and issues raised by weak identification. We provide references to, but spend little time on, conventional methods of inference, which is typically done using bootstrap <span id="page-30-0"></span>methods (Kilian, 1998, 2001) or by computing a Bayesian posterior distribution (Sims and Zha, 1998, 1999). For textbook treatments of VARs, conventional asymptotics, and conventional inference, see Lütkepohl (2015). Kilian (2015) and Bjørnland and Thorsrud (2015b) provide complementary summaries of SVAR methods, with more details and examples than are given here but without the focus on our four themes.

This section is written to complement the chapter by Ramey (2016, this Handbook); while the broad coverage of material is similar, this section focuses more on methods and econometric issues, while Ramey's chapter focuses more on applications and assessing identification in practice.

Section 4.1 lays out the SVAR notation and assumptions, including the normalization condition in Section 4.1.3. Various methods for identifying the SIRFs are discussed in Sections 4.2–4.7.

## 4.1 Structural Vector Autoregressions

SVAR analysis undertakes to identify the structural impulse responses of observable variables to one or more shocks, which are linear combinations of the VAR innovations.
